(Male narrator) In this piece, I show
how multimedia invites us
to move from concrete to abstract,
[western-themed music plays]
opening avenues for
emergent interpretation.
I also experiment with a mode of
response that recognizes
some of the limits
of critique and closure.
Critique can be competitive,
exclusionary, banal.
Closure can lead us to overlook
the generosity of the world
around us, including the world
of the texts that we study.
Practicing a mode of alt-scholarship,
I created a response to this poem
scrolling on the screen:
"A Blessing," by James Wright.
The poem is set off a rural highway
near Rochester, Minnesota.
It is about two companions who stumble
across a pair of horses in a meadow.
The poem suggests a bond
between human and animal
and among humans, an emotional connection.
This emotional connection is often lost
among the logic of academic closure.
But affect is linked to abstraction
and audio-visual registers,
which makes multimodal production
a space for emergent composing.
The works we study are rich and
ambiguous, unfolding like flowers.
Why not our responses?
These kinds of responses
can create new subjectivities.
"A Blessing" depicts a coming-together, as
the speaker and his companion
connect with two Indian ponies.
And the poem extends that
human-animal connection with a metaphor
that transcends the subject/object
divide and generates
a new sense of self,
at one with the world.
"Suddenly I realize / That if I stepped
out of my body
I would break / Into blossom."
On a Thursday morning,
I worked up a response
that plays with layering,
cameras, and screens.
I started with a YouTube
clip that depicts horses.
I began bringing together verbal
and visual representations,
[soft, Western music plays]
the literal associations translated into
mostly corresponding moving images.
I then used my laptop camera and
Photo Booth to film an adaptation.
[guitar strumming]
[guitar strumming volume is lowered]
Here, we have a typical instance
of a camera filming a subject,
with the added layering of a reflection of
the laptop on the surface of the guitar.
At the same time I used Snapz
to capture the Photo Booth application
recording on the screen.
I used a transparency application
to layer the YouTube video
over the Photo Booth application
as it filmed the guitar.
Snapz captured a composite of Photo Booth
filming and the YouTube video playing.
[guitar strumming]
[guitar strumming volume is lowered]
I next turned on a visualizer and
captured a clip with singing.
♪ The greener grass
starts at the edge of town. ♪
I also captured a scrolling video
of the text of the poem.
I brought all these materials
into a video editor,
made a few adjustments, and
uploaded my response to YouTube.
The process compressed a couple of hours
and several captures into a
three-and-a-half minute video
that interprets the poem
through creative response.
[guitar strumming]
♪ The greener grass
starts at the edge of town. ♪
[guitar strumming fades out]
I enjoyed mixing horse imagery with music
as a response to the poem,
but was not satisfied.
I wanted a response driven more
by affect and companionship,
something more abstract.
I started over with this footage
of drag racer Don Prudhomme,
captured just after his competitor's car
broke into pieces at over 200 mph.
Fortunately, the other racer was okay,
but Prudhomme did not
know this at the moment.
I combined this clip with
segments of another video
depicting the early days of drag racing,
a time that featured what
might be called a cherished rivalry
between Prudhomme and
fellow racer Tom McEwen.
The original translation
with horses was too literal—
horse reference to horse image.
I wanted to feel and share the
generative compassion in the poem.
Taking another tack, I created this
experiment in affective response.
[faint dialogue between drag racers]
(Drag racer) But we're in the program,
I think.
[dialog between drag racers]
[guitar strumming]
♪ The greener grass
starts at the edge of town. ♪
[guitar strumming]
♪ And there you'll find a wooden house
with windows wide
and porch steps leading down ♪
♪ To a meadow before evening casting dust
specks in the sunbeams all around ♪
♪ As by the willow tree you walk
pulled forward by the crickets' talk
and the water's sound ♪
[guitar strumming]
♪ Rochester your fields are
full of horses in the grasses. ♪
♪ You step a little closer
as each tender moment passes. ♪
♪ You know their skin is breathing
and the dust smells of forever. ♪
♪ You start to think of leaving
but you know that you will never. ♪
[guitar strumming]
♪ And turning from the road two
silhouettes in soft shadow
against the sky. ♪
♪ You see them as they're coming down
through corridors of dust specks
in the light. ♪
♪ And as they're moving closer and
your blood is flowing faster you realize ♪
♪ That when you come together you
will open like a blossom to a butterfly. ♪
[guitar strumming]
♪ Rochester your horses
know the secrets of the grasses. ♪
♪ They learn about forever with
each tender shoot that passes. ♪
♪ The heat beneath their
rippling skin is rising in the twilight. ♪
♪ And when you come together you
will open like blossom
to a butterfly. ♪
[guitar strumming]
[siren wailing]
♪ Rochester your secret's safe with me. ♪
♪ Rochester your secret's safe. ♪
♪ Rochester oh Rochester
oh Rochester. ♪
(TV Announcer) The emotions of
Don Prudhomme
♪ Rochester oh Rochester
oh Rochester. ♪
♪ Rochester your secret's safe with me. ♪
♪ Rochester your secret's safe. ♪